KEP-5018: DRA: AdminAccess for ResourceClaims and ResourceClaimTemplates (#5019)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-auth/5018-dra-adminaccess/README.md

claimed by their workloads.

This KEP proposes a mechanism for cluster administrators to mark a request in a
ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate with an admin access flag. This flag
allows privileged access to devices, enabling administrative tasks without
compromising security. Access to this mode is restricted to users authorized to
create ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate objects in namespaces marked with
the DRA admin label, ensuring that non-administrative users cannot misuse this
feature.

Note: Administrator workloads should not interfere with the application
workloads. If that cannot be supported due to hardware restrictions or that the
administrator workload is too demanding, then administrators should request
exclusive access for specific admin task such that no other claims are
allocated.

## Motivation

The current Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) feature enables users to request
resources but lacks a mechanism for cluster administrators to gain privileged
access to devices already in use by other users. This limitation restricts
administrators from performing tasks like:

- Monitoring device health or status.

> - Performing diagnostics and troubleshooting on devices shared across users.

Reviewer: I think read-mode is too restrictive.

This is more like "root" access:
- It may grant additional permissions.
- Similar to a root login in on a console, checks that prevent a normal user from logging into a machine are bypassed.

That this mode is used non-intrusively is up to the admin. They might also use it for something destructive, if that is what is being called for in certain situations.

> - Performing diagnostics and troubleshooting on devices shared across users.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth calling out that explicitly in alternatives, for example.

particularly in shared environments where devices are critical resources.

### Goals

- Provide a privileged mode for cluster administrators to access devices already
  in use.

- Ensure that only authorized users can use the privileged mode.

- Maintain security and prevent unauthorized access to devices.

### Non-Goals

- Redesign DRA.

- Extend privileged mode access to non-admin users.

- Define how administrators use the data accessed through privileged mode.

- Define which specific additional permissions are enabled by DRA drivers when
  this privileged mode is used.

## Proposal

### DRAAdminAccess Overview

This proposal enhances the `DRAAdminAccess` feature to enable cluster
administrators to mark requests in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate`
objects as privileged. This feature includes:

1. Admin Access Flag:

   A field in `ResourceClaim` and `ResourceClaimTemplate` specifications to
   indicate the request is in admin mode.

   Example:

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
   kind: ResourceClaim
   metadata:
     name: admin-resource-claim
     namespace: admin-namespace
   spec:
     resourceClassName: admin-resource-class

>      adminAccess: true

Reviewer: You are right, the example must be updated.

1. Grants privileged access to the requested device:

   For requests with `adminAccess: true`, the scheduler bypasses standard
   allocation checks and allows administrators to access devices already in use.
   This ensures privileged tasks like monitoring or diagnostics can be performed
   without disrupting existing allocations.

1. No impact on availability of claims:

   The scheduler ignores claims with `adminAccess: true`, normal usage is not
   impacted as claims in other namespaces can still be allocated using the same
   devices that are also accessed by workloads in the admin namespace.

### Workflow

1. A cluster administrator labels an admin namespace with
   `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access`.

1. Users who are authorized to create `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate`
   objects in this admin namespace can set `adminAccess: true` field if they
   want to.

1. Only users with access to the admin namespace can reference these
   `ResourceClaims` or `ResourceClaimTemplates` in their pod or deployment
   specs.

1. The DRA controller processes the request and grants privileged access to the
   requested device.

## Design Details

> ### API Changes

Author: done

rollback. If the pods were already running, they keep running. If the pods were
kept as unschedulable because the scheduler refused to allocate claims, then
they might now get scheduled.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

Tests for apiserver are covering disabling the feature. A test that the
DaemonSet controller tolerates keeping pods as pending is added.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

Will be considered for beta.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> Will be considered for beta.

Author: updated. also updated `How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?` section

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

Will be considered for beta.

###### What are other known failure modes?

<!--
For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:
  - [Failure mode brief description]
    - Detection: How can it be detected via metrics? Stated another way:
      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

Will be considered for beta.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

Will be considered for beta.

## Implementation History

> - Kubernetes 1.33: KEP accepted as "provisional".

Author: updated. was waiting for this PR to be approved before updating it to

> - Kubernetes 1.33: KEP accepted as "provisional".

Reviewer 2: Nit: you'll need to update it. I'd just write "Alpha version of the KEP" :wink:

> - Kubernetes 1.33: KEP accepted as "provisional".

Author: Thanks for the nit! I updated the kep.yaml but forgot this.

    // feature gate. Admin access is disabled if this field is unset or
    // set to false, otherwise it is enabled.
    //
    // +optional
    // +featureGate=DRAAdminAccess
    AdminAccess *bool
}
```

Admin access to devices is a privileged operation because it grants users access
to devices that are in use by other users. Drivers might also remove other
restrictions when preparing the device.

In Kubernetes 1.31 (before this KEP was introduced), an example validating
admission policy
[was provided](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/4aeaf1e99e82da8334c0d6dddd848a194cd44b4f/test/e2e/dra/test-driver/deploy/example/admin-access-policy.yaml#L1-L11)
which restricted access to this option. It was formerly the responsibility of
cluster admins to ensure that such a policy was installed if the cluster
shouldn't have allowed unrestricted access.

Starting in Kubernetes 1.33 (when this KEP was introduced), a validation has
been added to the REST storage layer to only authorize `ResourceClaim` or
`ResourceClaimTemplate` with `adminAccess: true` requests if their namespace has
the `kubernetes.io/dra-admin-access` label to only allow it for users with
additional privileges.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 3: This is missing the node and plugin at least, and maybe KCM too?

Reviewer: Here's a version of the flowchart which starts with claim creation from template (happens in KCM) and ends with the node operations.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    AA[Pod needs ResourceClaim for ResourceClaimTemplate] --> AB{adminAccess: true?}
    AB -- No --> A
    AB -- Yes --> AC{feature enabled?}
    AC -- No --> AY[refuse to create ResourceClaim, Pod remains pending]
    AC -- Yes --> A
    A[Request to API server to Create/Update ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate] --> B{adminAccess: true and feature enabled?}
    B -- No --> E
    B -- Yes --> D[Check Namespace Label]
    D -- Label Present --> E[Request Allowed]
    D -- No Label --> F[Request Rejected]
    E --> G[Resource Created/Updated]
    G --> H[Kubernetes Scheduler evaluates ResourceClaim]
    H -- Admin Access Devices --> I[Skip allocation checks; Device is not allocated]
    H -- Standard Claims --> J[Proceed with standard allocation checks]
    J --> K
    I --> K
    K[kubelet asks DRA driver to prepare the ResourceClaim] --> L
    L[DRA driver reads full ResourceClaim] --> M
    M[DRA driver may grant additional permissions for devices with admin access]
 ```

flowchart TD

>     A[Admission Request to Create/Update ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate] --> B{adminAccess: true?}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    A[Request to API server to Create/Update ResourceClaim or ResourceClaimTemplate] --> B{adminAccess: true?}
```
